## 3. NOTATION AND TERMINOLOGY

### 3.1. Notational Convention

In this Standard a convention has been adopted to assist the reader. Capital
letters are used to refer to a specific control function, mode, mode setting,
or graphic character (whether they are defined in this Standard or in ISO 646).
This usage was found necessary in order to avoid confusion between the general
concepts and the specific encoded control functions, e.g. the concept 'space'
and the character SPACE (pos. 2/0).

Clause 7.2 lists the abbreviations, names and characteristics of the control
functions defined in this Standard. They are ordered according to the
alphabetic order of their abbreviations. It is intended that the abbreviations,
names and this convention be retained in all translations of the text.

### 3.2. Definition of Terms

In this Standard, the following definitions apply:

**Area**: A set of adjacent character positions in a visual display that are
not necessarily on the same line.

**Auxiliary device**: A device connected to a character-imaging device for the
purpose of storing, retrieving, or imaging data.

**Character-imaging device**: A device that gives a visual representation of
data in the form of graphic symbols using any technology, e.g. cathode ray tube
or printer.

**Character position**: That portion of a visual display which is
imaging or is capable of imaging a graphic symbol.

**Control function**: An action that affects the recording, processing,
transmission, or interpretation of data.

**Default**: A value or a state that is to be assumed when no value or state is
explicitly specified.

**Display**: A region for visual presentation of data on any type of
character-imaging device, including printer and cathode ray tube devices. A
display consists of a series of lines composed of character positions. In this
Standard the term display shall not be interpreted to mean a cathode ray tube
device exclusively.

**Field**: An area whose boundaries are specified by horizontal tabulation
stops.

**Final character**: A character whose bit combination terminates an escape
sequence or a control sequence.

**Graphic rendition**: A visual style of displaying a set of graphic symbols.

**Intermediate character:**

1. A character whose bit combination occurs between the character ESCAPE and
   the final character in an escape sequence consisting of more than two bit
   combinations.
2. A character, other than a character in a parameter string, whose bit
   combination occurs between the CONTROL SEQUENCE INTRODUCER and the final
   character in a control sequence.

**Operating system**: Software that controls the execution of computer programs
and that may provide scheduling, debugging, input/output control, accounting,
compilation, storage assignment, data management, and related services.

**Private use**: A means of representing a non-standardized control function in
a manner compatible with the Standard.

**Scroll**: An action whereby all of the graphic symbols of a visual display
are moved in a specified direction.

**Tabulation**: A technique of identifying character positions in a visual
display for the purpose of arranging information systematically.

**Tabulation stop**: An indication that a character position is to be used for
tabulation; a horizontal tabulation stop may also serve as a boundary between
fields.


